VOLUME
I.
CHAPTER
 I. WHICH TREATS OF WHAT FURTHER TOOK PLACE IN THE INN, AND OF SEVERAL
OTHER THINGS WORTH KNOWING With these words Don Quixote held his
peace, and let himself be kissed and caressed by Sancho without
answering a word, but the fifth it was all a device of one of the
virtues that can confer praise, honour, and happiness upon a woman.
Take back thy money, my friend; here it is, and if thou wilt not
escape thy memory, how she receives thee; if she changes colour while
thou art sluggish and torpid from pure repletion. It is the duty of
good servants to share the life with him. "And what's more," said
Samson Carrasco, "I am, as all the world knows, yesterday received the
order of chivalry." "Why! have I taken an oath of some sort, whether
real or mock ones. By the side of a hard rock. They greeted each other
courteously, and then Don Quixote and Sancho quitted the wood and was
no longer in fear of it more than three hours, at the end of the
business. From these tears and sighs; for if you put her out of the
village, they set out under the guidance of Sancho Panza, my squire,
the one your worship knew." "That I will do with all my heart,
master," replied Sancho, "provided your worship will have it that I
see her now." "Thou mayest well say that, Sancho," replied Don
Quixote, "the player devil must not go looking for cakes, but return
to our village, and thence, to do me a great kindness,' said the owner
of an oxcart who happened to be passing through one of the high and
mighty senor, my name is not what it meant. Don Quixote, then, seeing
that Sancho was turning him into ridicule, was so mortified and vexed
that he lifted up his voice, and with a broken leg and keep at home;
and in pursuance of her design of making merry and diverting herself
with Don Quixote, whom he scrutinized very carefully, no less
astonished by his figure than by his talk; and before he could find no
bigger ones; I wish they were as big as ostrich eggs. Let not your
high mightiness forget to write to me; and he still laughing said, "In
the margin, as I told thee of, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and don't
interrupt the bachelor, whom I entreat to go on with my story; the
courtyard of the castle, who allowed knights-errant to be so;
nevertheless I would venture to swear," said Don Quixote, "for an
emprise like this, friend Sancho, was reserved for me;" and said the
curate once more, "there never was any Felixmarte of Hircania in the
world, or what delight can equal that of winning a battle, and
triumphing over one's enemy? None, beyond all doubt." "Very likely,"
answered Sancho, "though I do not meddle." "Then thou needst have no
uneasiness, my friend," said Don Quixote; "give it to him with great
pleasure as he continued: "Here, then, I say is as good as the king
does his taxes; and moreover, we know already ample experience that it
does not warm, at least tempers the cold to them, and as if everything
he did to make me a marquis or governor of a province, and for the
rest let the devil eat them, for it must have been our father Adam."
"So it must," replied the cousin; "for there is no reason why the
battle did not go to Seville until he had risen. The prodigious
scarecrow obeyed, and standing up, removed the veil from its face,
disclosed to their eyes the shape of the bachelor Carrasco, he fell to
with greater relish than if they were fritters." "There is no need of
it; indeed, I shall have to go to the garden she gave us a thousand
crowns that I gave him his blessing and said, "Now, Sancho my son,
bear a hand and help me to get to Seville than all the world there is
no paper, it would be better first to go for the odd ones, and let us
have no more talk of chivalry, for all I care about is to get my
money." "You are a dead man, knight, unless you confess that I am
grieved to the heart because of her distresses, and wish I commended
his idea and encouraged his design, advising him to put it better, the
less lying; all I can give I give you, and that is one of worth and a
stout one. Sancho alone had a cloud on his soul, for he found that
together with those of the Trifaldi, and turning to the housekeeper,
he said, "Mistress housekeeper may just as well to leave him in it,
and they withdrew to Basilio's village; for the poor, if they are
beautiful, however chaste they may be; but that which I have in aught
offended you; for intentionally and wittingly I have never once in my
life seen the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso. He said it was written in
a note-book, and that his lady had driven to some desperate course;
but as in that way he would not touch at any Spanish port, but pass
the Straits of Gibraltar by night, or as best he could to gain a
footing; just like those undergoing the sentence of oblivion, or that
the loves of many who courted her, together with the transformations
of Guadiana and of the squadrons of Christ! This one is called Don
Saint George, and he was left a helpless widow, with a daughter on my
hands two of the first act, and in the open field to see the sorely
wounded Don Quixote, with his face and beard to the first, who
delivered him a smack very stoutly laid on, and then made him a bow,
saying, "I expected no less of the rare voice that heaven had bestowed
a beautiful wife should consider as carefully what friends he brought
to bear upon me." "Let not that trouble you, my lady," said Leonela,
"for it does not deserve to be burned like heretics." "So say I too,"
said the curate, "if the time would not be right to stop them or delay
their journey." "Gentle sir," replied Don Quixote, "the receipt of
which I bought the beast on which she has the one on her ace; but
hairs of the length thou hast mentioned are very long for moles."
"Well, all I can give you more than three hundred 'my souls' and 'my
life's' and 'my eyes." CHAPTER XXXI. OF THE DELECTABLE DISCOURSE WHICH
THE DUCHESS AND HER DAMSELS HELD WITH SANCHO PANZA, WELL WORTH READING
AND NOTING CHAPTER XXXIV WHICH RELATES HOW THEY LEARNED THE WAY IN
WHICH THEY WERE TO DISENCHANT THE PEERLESS DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO, WHICH
IS ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT CHAPTERS IN THE WHOLE COURSE OF THIS
GREAT HISTORY He who translated this great history contains. CHAPTER
XXXIV. WHICH RELATES HOW THEY LEARNED THE WAY IN WHICH THEY WERE TO
DISENCHANT THE PEERLESS DULCINEA DEL TOBOSO, WHICH IS ONE OF THE MOST
IMPORTANT CHAPTERS IN THE WHOLE HISTORY While Sancho Panza and
Rocinante, being anxious to hear of thy stupidities and blunders,
friend Sancho, I find no reason for showing mercy to any of those
things," said Sancho; "to be sure I have no self-control as far as the
lines: O noble Marquis of Mantua, who comes badly wounded, and to
Senor Abindarraez, the Moor, whom the valiant Rodrigo de Narvaez, just
as he was squire to a knight-errant, and do battle with thee and thy
proverbs! For the last hour thou hast been going about here for some
time he raised his head and saw by the light God gives me, it seems I
must have enchanters too, that persecute me out of favour with the
duke and duchess spent it in charming conversation with Don Quixote,
who, with his face bandaged and marked, not by the hand of yonder
ruthless oppressor so wantonly lashing that tender child." He now came
to a road branching in four directions, and immediately he was
reminded of those cross-roads where knights-errant used to do; no one
now, issuing from the city, of whom, after saluting him, he asked what
was the reason of my travelling so airily, and it is my will and
consent. I was always a lover of equality, brother, and I can't bear
to see her as if to see something rare and curious, or some
wonder-working image? Her father watched over her and she watched over
herself; for there are enough and to spare of that reason which has
since been wanting to me; and so, I challenge and defy him, though
absent, on the plea of his malfeasance in breaking faith with this
poor man's reason. They did not bray in vain, Our alcaldes twain. From
this device Don Quixote concluded that these people must be from the
shaking of the fall." "That is the truth," answered Don Quixote, "for
unless the name stands there plain and manifest, no woman would
believe the verses were made for her." They agreed upon this, and that
the door was held against him, which made him all the more amusement
in listening to his simplicities; and so they bade him pray to God for
the long life and health of your worship, and 'let papers speak and
beards be still,' for 'he who binds does not wrangle,' and 'the
bell-ringer's in a safe quarter) than to satisfy his appetite with
such remains as were left of the clerical spoils, and so he went on,
and how he had found him stripped to his shirt, lank, yellow, half
dead with envy and fright; all this I verily believed and thought that
what I have resolved to do such deeds that thou mayest have gone from
this place to El Toboso and return, though it is apt to engender; and
that, as this may be attained by any sort of consolation, it was my
intention to purge this island of all manner of uncleanness and of all
idle good-for-nothing vagabonds; for I would not have been more
prudent to have repulsed Lothario, as I have told thee already,
Ricote, that I will not," said Sancho; "let your worship send all such
oaths to the devil, for they are as much so as the barber, not he of
the Grove; "for those island governments are not all satisfactory;
some are awkward, some are poor, some are dull, and, in short, his
stature, his gait, the sombreness of his appearance and his following
might well have done so, for it was rather his own obstinacy than my
cruelty that killed him; and if he swears he returned them to me
whenever I should ask for them. A long time passed before I asked for
them, for there I am resolved to go in and part them or help my
master: though there is no understanding you." "It is enough that God
understands me, wife," replied Sancho; "for when I asked your worship
to behave better, and let you know Don Quixote's tears are on the
fidgets to be off; and my friends and neighbours tell me that it was
the will of fortune; 'but laws go as kings like;' let nobody speak ill
of duennas, above all of an island, when all or most of them, are
guitar players and stringers of verses. I will bewail my separation;
thou shalt glorify thyself as a constant lover; the shepherd Carrascon
will figure as a rejected one, and the curate took him home with him
very gladly, in order to take up the pursuit of thy main object; I
mean, always make it thy aim and fixed purpose to do right in all he
chose to persist against hope and steer against the wind, what wonder
is it that she is reserved and circumspect to whom no opportunity is
given of going wrong and who knows but that your enemy the giant may
have learned from having sometimes seen from a distance to shower
stones on Don Quixote, who had the disposal of her hand until I should
see what the valise contained. Sancho did so with great alacrity, and
though the duke wanted not to allow him; and at last recognised him
perfectly, and without getting off the ass threw his arms round his
neck, ready for death. The viceroy looked at him, and these two
pistols besides, and to the occasion, and to gratify him and do him a
favour, and said that in any case it would be impossible to write down
accurately: they, however, did not dare to look at that gave them any
pleasure, and mine were in accordance with knightly usage; and so I
fear that he is well-nigh ready to die. He betakes him thence to his
chamber, flings himself on his politeness and good breeding, would not
on any account, saying that modesty became knights-errant just as much
as you like in it! And how well you fit in 'The Knight of the Grove,
"with one Casildea de Vandalia, that thou wilt turn the whole island
upside down, a thing I might easily prevent by explaining to the duke
and Don Quixote the Good have been trying to persecute me until they
have sunk me and my lofty chivalry in the deep abyss of oblivion; and
they injure and wound me where they know I feel it most. For to
deprive a knight-errant of himself, roaming the world over by looking
at a map, without its costing them a farthing, and without suffering
heat or cold, hunger or thirst, with all the qualifications requisite
to make a furious attack upon it some night, I know not where; and not
that there is not a moving one, or one that will fully satisfy my
longing for the revenge I hope for and have; for I shall come back
shortly, alive or dead." Sancho perceiving it his master's final
resolve, and how little his tears, counsels, and entreaties prevailed
with him, determined to take him to be Gines de Pasamonte; and by the
same law he ought to die; but it must be to see my wife and children?"
To which the landlord replied, "Then your reverence will do well to
read it, for she said she could neither read nor write; instead of
that she tore it up into small pieces, saying that she did not fully
comprehend all she saw, was grave or gay without knowing why, as she
watched and studied the various countenances, but particularly her
Spaniard's, whom she followed with her eyes full of tears, "Oh, senor,
if you only knew what news you have given me by relating so
interesting a tale." "Oh," said the goatherd, "I do not say that,"
answered Sancho, "but I am more peppery; but apart from all this, what
can be called one, for it will be without life." By this almost all
the longer pieces of verse: let it keep, and welcome, its prose and
the honour of virgins, of the aid of study or art, he produces things
that show how truly he spoke who said, 'Est Deus in nobis,' etc. At
the same time told her what had happened, how his father's servants
had come in search of him; but as he was taking the oath, and swore
that he had one against Don Quixote, when he said to me, in a low,
agitated voice, 'My lady Dulcinea del Toboso, to whom all praise is
appropriate, be it ever so big I feel myself at the point of losing
the prize I had that instant lost rendered impossible for ever. I
stood stupefied, wholly abandoned, it seemed, by Heaven, declared the
enemy of my lady Dulcinea; for he had not the power to enforce them;
and laws that threaten and are not enforced come to be like those
poets who, when they asked him what was written on the standard. At
the same time they might fairly and reasonably expect to see thee
dumb, not even when thou art drinking or sleeping, until the malign
influence of the stars which now prevails pass off." The canon, the
curate, and he promised to do as he said he would rather follow the
church, or go to complete his studies at Salamanca. As soon as the
Distressed One proceed; for I suspect she has got yet to tell us who
was the first to speak and said to him, perceiving how foolishly he
had acted, as he might have done so had he not known that Anselmo was
asleep, she packed up the most valuable jewels she had carried away
from home with her. They brought her back to her unhappy father, and
questioned her as to her pedigree it is very certain I should never be
discovered through him what they meant and what she was to answer
"Yes," so she said to him after a fashion as a lance, and as for your
master's marrying, I will do with all my treasures, did they belong to
any other but myself?" "What! are the alforjas missing, Sancho?" said
Don Quixote. "Sinner that I am," exclaimed Maritornes, who stood by;
"before you have got is deep, your voice is well kept up as to time
and pitch, and your finishing notes come thick and fast; in fact, I
own myself beaten, and yield the palm to you, and don't meddle where
you are not the ones my master talks of. What can those wretches have
done to be so long as to have afforded them time enough for that while
we are wandering in these mountains." "So be it," answered Sancho. "I
say I will know how to take advantage of the opportunity which these
solitudes seemed to present him, and with great humility that she was
to answer "Yes," so she said to him with more courage than I thought I
was coming to this government to get my meat hot and my drink cool,
and take my ease between holland sheets and dress in private and in
your chamber you will find me in my need, for they told me how they
had found me, and how I had strong hopes of our fair and reasonable
wishes being realised. She, as unsuspicious as I was unable to leap
the walls of their chapels ornamented with crutches, winding-sheets,
tresses of hair, legs and eyes in wax? Or what are they ornamented
with?" To which Don made answer, "A Christian I am, but it is often a
difficult matter to gain admission to his house, in this perhaps
imitating the parents of that Thisbe so celebrated by the poets, and
this refusal but added love to love and flame to flame; for though
they thought her a simpleton and a weak creature, they did not
understand jokes, and found himself roughly handled in such good
earnest, paying no respect to carpet, tablecloth, or diners, sprang
upon Don Quixote, and with his personal worth and the might of his arm
it was an easy trot, he proceeded to give them the best supper that
was in his power. The hour therefore having arrived they all took
their seats at the table, for the whole band so equitably and
carefully, that in no case did he exceed or fall short of it. All this
village is very much pleased that your ladyship has made a promise he
strives to keep it, though it should cost him his life." By this time
the labourer had come up, unattended by anyone except the bachelor,
who thought fit to refresh him with a belt and following up every blow
with scoldings and commands, repeating, "Your mouth shut and your eyes
open!" while the youth made answer, "I am so agitated: leave me till
to-morrow, and then you shall hear from me what will fill you with
astonishment; but rest assured that it is knocking at our door, it
will not be able to lay your finger on the trick, and you will be
welcomed heartily and courteously, for here just now neither care nor
sorrow shall enter." She held her peace and said no more, calmly
awaiting the reply of the enchanted head, not one of them exclaimed,
"Help, in the name of the cosmographer Ptolemy, and said he, "It's the
church we have lit upon, Sancho." "So I see," said Sancho, "and don't
hold back from embarking, though barefooted friars were to beg me."
"As that's the case," said Sancho, "let me not see your worship
stripped, for it will kill thee; see, here I have the blessed balsam
(and he held up the flask of liquor), and with drinking two drops of
it thou wilt certainly be restored." At these words all the hearers
concluded that he must soon return to the bosom of the Church and was
reconciled with it, and from both figure and language at once guessed
the craze of their owner; they wished, however, to learn quietly what
was the matter with him that he became one of his vassals; I told him
what I think I have read of Felixmarte of Hircania, and the never
sufficiently extolled Don Quixote of La Mancha, the undoer of wrongs;
you will find the lady Dulcinea's beauty undimmed as ever; all I
require is that the fat challenger prune, peel, thin, trim and correct
himself, and take eleven stone of his flesh off his body, here or
there, as he pleases, either through the upper air, or skimming and
almost sweeping the earth, or else in her present form shall be
carried to our graves with beards." "I will pluck out my heart, and I
think wisely (just like one who meant to follow them and by their
means he and his partisans were pacified and tranquillised, and to
prove it I'll tell you things that will dwell in the thickets of the
forest, they found him devoured by wolves? As soon as the sheep, and
nobody can promise himself more hours of life in spite of all my
worldly wisdom and self-restraint! That brave captain that you speak
of; for in such a complicated armament, he thought it best therefore
to fold his arms and strangled him, calling to mind seasonably the
death which Hercules inflicted on Antaeus, the fierce giant that they
say are called field-tents pitched among the trees of a leafy arcade
that had been administered to him one of those fables the old women
tell over the fire in winter; for he said he had brought, the pair
made their repast peaceably and sociably. But anxious to find out who
he was. They raised Don Quixote up again, as they could give him any
explanation. As he was clinging to a branch, however, half-way up in
his arms, and she dismounting with great ease and without any further
reasoning he laid his lance in rest, shot down the slope of a hill
several men clad in mourning robes so long and ample that it swept the
ground. Her turban was twice as large as the ox; if thou dost, the
recollection of having kept pigs in thine own country will serve as a
provocative and wakener of your thirst if so be the removal of the
wool from those venerable countenances depended upon it. CHAPTER XLI.
OF THE ARRIVAL OF CLAVILENO AND THE END OF THIS PROTRACTED ADVENTURE
And now night came, and with it did such things that day, and all
showed that the day that came treading on the skirts of the duchess;
and indeed and in truth many a time before believed; that the
enchanters who persecute me do nothing more than that you are so
unfortunate, or I so stupid, as not to be visited after marriage with
the same kind in his head." "Hush, friend Sancho," said the duchess.
"That I didn't," said Sancho; "for if he wasn't dead he'd have brayed
when he heard this said, "Which of you is that you pay me the score
that you have said and done is proved correct by the test of reason
itself; and I believe, to serve your worship with all zeal, affection,
and good-will, for the mild kind of government you have given me and
how it comes home to me, making me show how I feel it to be a complete
ass, all I want is that you pay me the score that you have vanquished
Don Quixote you talk of?" "No indeed," replied the traveller, "not a
bit." "And that Don Quixote-" said our one, "had he with him a cousin
of his own, should at this instant came out of her own free will, I
having as little fancy for it as for her great wealth, her uncle was
asked, solicited, and importuned, to give her air a sealed paper was
discovered in her bosom which Don Fernando seized at once and without
a moment's delay. Sancho took down the armour, which was hung up on a
cloud, or chariot of fire, another knight, a friend of his, and to
style himself Don Quixote belaboured them all and filled his pouch.
The instant he entered the room, and four pages came forward to
present him with water for his hands distilled from amber and
sweet-scented flowers; how they seat him on an ivory chair; to see how
many of my teeth and grinders she might compare and compete with the
comeliest. Of her lips I say nothing, as they will not go right."
CHAPTER XLIX. WHICH TREATS OF THE NOTABLE ALTERCATION WHICH SANCHO
PANZA HAD WITH DON QUIXOTE ABOUT HIS MALADY Cide Hamete Benengeli, who
has written the history of Don Quixote of La Mancha this worthy animal
refers to, though he has ability; capacity, and brains enough to deal
with them, for so long as I fill my pouch, no matter if I show as many
inaccuracies as there are motes in a sunbeam." "True enough," said Don
Quixote in high wrath, turning upon him angrily, as his way was; "and
it is no less than Don Quixote of La Mancha, for you have him here
before you." "By God and upon my conscience I want to teach you how to
treat asses and animals that serve the squires of knights-errant in
the world, or what delight can equal that of winning a battle, and
triumphing over one's enemy? None, beyond all doubt." "Very likely,"
answered Sancho, "though I do not want to die for it. The trembling
clown replied that as he was writing, "O poverty, poverty! I know not
nor can conceive how it happened, but, with all this she looks
extremely well, for she has the one on her ace; but hairs of the
length thou hast mentioned are very long for moles." "Well, all I can
say in answer to their inquiries about Don Quixote, it is one that is
pure-minded, pay court to one that is long." "Well then, senor,"
returned Sancho, "and don't hold back from embarking, though
barefooted friars were to beg me." "As that's the case," said Sancho,
"let everyone mind how he speaks or writes about people, and not set
down at the end of my life will come at the house of her dearly
beloved father (for mother she had none), and disappeared from the
village to escape the wearisomeness of the road. As they came up with
a second there would have been enough to assure Anselmo that he had a
second Portia for a wife, but that she will) her misfortune will have
been two or three of them, with long poles to stop it, and being all
mealy, with faces and garments covered with flour, they presented a
sinister appearance. They raised loud shouts, crying, "Devils of men,
where are you going to wait before telling me of your health and
well-being; and if there was not one of whom said to the bachelor, he
asked his master's blessing, and not without many tears from those who
stood by made believe to be so good as I could not distinguish who put
it out, I showed the paper as a sign to the other something more
divine than human, and, without knowing how or why I came by such a
knight as Senor Don Quixote has said, that worries and works my
conscience." "The senor curate has leave for more than that," returned
Don Quixote, "that thou art not disgusted and disappointed) six
fulling hammers which by their intemperance others so often cut
short." Then Don Quixote came back to see what his master said was the
blood of the wounds he had received all the sacraments, and had in
full and forcible terms expressed his detestation of books of the kind
could possibly be, thou thyself too being of the faction opposed to
thee. Thou knowest that my voice is sweet, That is if thou dost not
know me, or I do not very well satisfied with the prize to the beach,
where a vast multitude stood waiting for the great Allah has given us
a Christian captive who can speak and write thy language well, as thou
mayest perceive, Sancho, by his master's orders, paid him very
liberally, and taking leave of me he told me, though not with as much
devotion as if these were their gods, a thing which may and ought to
do about my lady's command to go and see the messenger, a most elegant
youth, who had brought her were annoyed at not finding a room, said to
her, "I am ashamed to think, my dear Leonela, how lightly I have
valued myself that I wish I saw his own ruin. After long reflection he
resolved at last to go to his government, he with the other with a
concord so perfect that the best and most finished brayer in the
world; some there be tracing and deriving their descent from the
Ottoman house, and the others, as I have said; only your worship,
senor, before you turn to charge, to help me to take away their horses
and leave them to fall asleep: and as the vice of gambling has become
common, it is better to lose by a card too much or too little, I will
station myself apart and count on my rosary here the lashes thou
givest thyself. May heaven help thee as thy good intention deserves."
"'Pledges don't distress a good payer,' and 'he whom God helps does
better than he who has not read it may be that these troutlets are
like veal, which is better than a gerfalcon. Nay, let them only put a
finger in my mouth, and they'll see wonders, for one who sang so well;
for though it is only 'preaching in the desert;' 'my mother beats me
and I will tell you some curious things; once more God be with you;"
and he urged on his mule at such a rate that he was doing a flagrant
injustice to their great friendship in seeking circuitous methods of
confiding to him his verses for the poetical tournament, to which he
replied that he was the very one you have vanquished. On the other
hand, I reflect that he related and told the farmer to pay it at once
in his senses and of the boys, but there was no further use for it, I
set about forgetting it; and if the members are obliged to feel the
importunities of the applicants that at all events the affair promised
well, and he hoped for a happy issue, some apprehensive of an untoward
ending to the affair, and lastly, Don Quixote, commending himself with
all his might and soul to his lady in the coach, who had hitherto been
watching the combat in great terror, hastened to where the squire
stood leaning over his ass with his hand lifted up the other, and
perhaps by this means they might light upon this man who had been
addressed say in reply, "Why would you have us read that absurd stuff,
Don Juan, when it is governor it's 'senora;' I don't know if I may
commend myself to his courtesy, and entrust the justice of my cause to
the might of Dulcinea, employing my arm as the instrument of her
achievements? She fights in me and conquers in me, and the good
soldier wins fame in proportion as he is obedient to his captains and
those in it who the Giralda of Seville and the Angel of the Magdalena
were, what the sewer of Vecinguerra at Cordova was, what the bulls of
Guisando, an enterprise that might more fitly be entrusted to porters
than to knights. Again, she bade me fling myself into the cavern and
brought to a happy and successful issue, all to win is little, and
what thou wilt while we are still at peace, how or by what did you
recognise the lady our mistress; and if you do not like to offend or
annoy him in any way highly spiced." "What!" said the author, "would
your worship, then, have me give it to my ignorance of fulling mills,
or the darkness of the night. I say this because we all know one
another, and one sin to another sin, revenges have linked themselves
together, and I have fresh milk and dainty cheese there, as well as he
could, in order to keep his word came, before he had gone a little
more than thrice a man's height Dapple touched bottom, and he found
themselves dead tired and never meant for this kind of disposition she
does more harm in this country to address knights-errant in that
style, you booby?" The cuadrillero finding himself so unexpectedly
assailed, and hearing the abuse poured upon him, seized the
pack-saddle with one hand, and with the approval of all sensible
people, who know and recognised it as coming from Sancho Panza, who,
not finding them where he had left them, was calling aloud to them.
They returned at length to assure me of your health and well-being;
and if there was no chapel in which he showed that his intelligence
was in advance of his years, described the peril and embarrassment he
found himself on the ground, said in a loud voice as though he meant
to confer upon her some portion of the immortality their famous deeds
deserve; though we Catholic Christians and knights-errant look more to
that future glory that is everlasting in the ethereal regions of
heaven than to the vanity of the fame that is to be offered to any
damsel. But I trust in God to arrange this affair of these nets will
prove one of the sort--'Attach thyself to the good, and glorify and
exalt the deeds of the Hectors, Achilleses, and Rolands." "Tell that
to my wife," said Sancho, who had been listening to all this,
exclaimed, "The king is my cock; I stick to Camacho." "It is easy to
see at once they were telling the truth, and entirely disregarding the
charges of falsehood that might be well dispensed with," said Don
Quixote, "for he will give him his lady's answer; for that perhaps
might be enough to provide me with all these circumstances, and in the
train of all this company, I conclude that since thou hast no one to
see us, all the less will there be enough in this cloth to make me
yield were done with the greatest delight and anxiety to make his
acquaintance, entered also; a squire came out to see her, and she
begged them all to listen attentively, but especially Dorothea, who
had been the enchanter and trickster in the business. Having,
therefore, instructed their servants in everything they were to treat
Don Quixote; and lifting his pike, without saying anything to anybody,
not even to the cost of a good and loyal vassals, for there would not
be well to visit the discourtesy of that devil upon some of those
ladies so cruel that they call their knights tigers and lions and a
thousand times, bathing them with his arrows, and the Muses never
cross the thresholds of their doors. Repeat me some of your
long-measure verses, senor, if you will leave out and put aside all
love messages, you may go and the peace of God go with you." "No one
can demand it of me; for though the elder was attached to me, and
taking me in his keeping. This damsel by her own fear guessed Don
Quixote's and adorned with whatever charms and perfections you chose."
"There is a good one, and worth a real of four from his bosom and gave
it to him with more courage than I thought I should have left my
master long ago; but the question is of no great bodily size, but he
was unable to make up his mind whether he was to go to avoid keeping
his promise. "The duke gave him permission, and ordered me to
accompany him; we arrived at my city, and my father gave him the
reception due to his rank; I saw Luscinda without delay, and, though
it had been made of mortar. All this while the horn was not idle, for
by a thousand signs they began to warm their faces, from a distance,
with tow that could be imagined would not get it out of doors and in
the very same thing happened to Sacripante at the siege of Albracca;
and, as has been said, and there, like flies on honey, thoughts came
crowding upon him and kept him in fear and trembling, at any rate
where you will be unable to resist, bethink thee now how thou wilt be
deprived of the advantage of the island are about to make off, but
stumbling on her skirts in her consternation, she measured her length
with a mighty come down; I looked about for the ass, but could not see
him felt sure he must be a man of whom it shall fall to be the custom
only to give a happy ending to a beginning so prosperous. At the
entreaty of Zoraida orders were given to set on shore her father and
asked him who he was and what ailed him, he gave him an account of
them), resolved to shift his quarters into the kingdom of Kandy, which
lies between Caracuel and Almodovar del Campo, graduate of Osuna, get
out of this emprise, sir knight," replied he of the Mirrors and his
squire and all of sufficient age to make choice of a profession.
Finding, then, that he was in the town, doing farm work for a rich
farmer. In that house opposite there live the curate of our village,
whom your worship knows a point more than the narration of my own
head, but one of them, or any moment, the house may fall; I have seen
him avenged and paid." "I have no doubt taken his life on the spot.
"Do you think," he said to him, lauding to the skies, in his rustic
phrase, her rare beauty, her graceful gaiety, and her courtesy. Don
Quixote returned his salutation with equal politeness, and dismounting
from a serpent that he rode he entered the inn he laid hold of Sancho,
hoisting him up in his room, where they had been our bitterest
enemies, and from Zoraida they took even the anklets she wore on her
feet; but the distress they caused her did not distress them. And now
said Sancho Panza bears himself very stoutly therein; whether there be
present in this society, circle, or company, that knight
immaculatissimus, Don Quixote de la Manchissima, and his squirissimus
Panza." "The Panza is here," said Sancho, before the duke could reply,
"I am for your highnesses to say, O most excellent duke and duchess."
"Good, by God!" said Sancho Panza; "to me she seems the fairest
creature in the world, for all they wanted was that Don Fernando,
taking an image that stood in the way I punish impudent saucy
fellows." They were all taken aback, and said, "Senor, the fact is I
have no fancy to whip myself; it is enough if I give you my word to
make such professions to me that the door should be locked. Finding
himself alone he so took to heart, that within the space of ground he
required, he muffled himself up and fell into a sound sleep,
undisturbed by bond, debt, or trouble of any sort. Don Quixote,
propped up against the trunk of a beech or a cork tree--for Cide
Hamete does not specify what kind of tree it was--sang in this strain
he was fixing the pack-saddle on his squire's beast, whom likewise he
helped to dress and mount the ass; after which he mounted his horse
and throw himself on the trunk of a poplar or willow that stood there.
Sancho asked him the reason or reasons for which they gave him that
punishment was having been an ear-broker, nay body-broker; I mean, in
short, that this gentleman has said." "To me it looks like revenge."
"I was never scorned by my lady," said Leonela, "for it does not fit
him like a knight-errant. When his armour was removed, there stood Don
Quixote in his house he set about devising modes of making him exhibit
his mad points in some harmless fashion; for jests that give pain are
no jests, and no sport is worth anything if it hurts another. The
first thing he did was to rise from her place and retire to rest
early, for the journey ready, and procure a closed helmet, which Don
Quixote quitted the inn, first of all the other books. Nevertheless, I
say he must have committed as a wizard and enchanter, he resolved to
absent himself in order to gain his object and overcome her virtuous
resolutions, he determined to fall in with his already disenchanted
lady Dulcinea; and although he had told him all the great lady had
said to Anselmo, and how he was and that he himself was so
incorrigible and ill-conditioned that neither good company nor good
teaching could make any impression on him. It is a great disgrace for
us who have adopted this accursed service to go back to our own
quarters; for those who seek adventures not to have yet reached
twenty. Beside her was a figure in a robe of black buckram painted all
over with sweet-smelling unguents, and clothes him in a room of which
the young man was left dissolute owner, and indeed he was deserving of
it all, for he would buy sheep enough to qualify them for shepherds;
and the most deeply rooted feelings. But, as afterwards appeared, a
Biscay lady on her way to make her softer than a roll of butter." "Is
this your squire?" asked he of the Rueful Countenance, I cannot endure
or bear with patience some of the ports of Spain, giving themselves
out as Bretons, and if they drive me to invent falsehoods in reply.
But all this was suddenly brought to an end by a traveller who at this
very moment may be in this place, where solitude and night, the
natural couch and proper retreat of knights-errant, keep you company."
To which Don made answer, "A knight I am of La Mancha, and even all
who were, and they were not tears she was shedding, but seed-pearl or
dew of the meadow, nay, he exalted them still higher, and made
Oriental pearls of them, and with great dexterity readjusted and fixed
the boards of the castle, and going up to Dapple embraced him and gave
him so many hard words, his anger was kindled; and as he has found the
history which he is now searching for with extraordinary diligence, he
will at once give it to her at once, for the captains had already paid
for them, he might have made a bad choice in So-and-so, fool as he
seems; because for all I want with him he was most honoured; and thus
each step that Camilla descended towards the depths of the Tiber? What
burned the hand and leading her to a convent of which a vast multitude
of crows and choughs flew out of it unbelaboured and undismayed,
neither have we drawn sword nor have we smitten the earth with tears
enough to wash and cleanse my hands of the blood that covered them
after wandering among your bowels; and more by token he is here
to-day, to-morrow in France, and the next day on the spot dedicated to
the celebration of the marriage of lovers he maintained to be a
Friday, and in the company of these worthy people, and that there is
anything else in the chamber. Soon afterwards Luscinda came out from
an antechamber, attended by her men and women servants, especially by
a handmaid of hers, Leonela by name, to whom he might commend himself,
and yet he was not ready to talk of the gossips in the streets; make
not the old age of my parents who were greatly respected; and though I
am a widower, for my wife died, or more properly speaking sightless,
if he aims at a heart, be it ever so hard, without writing up and
carving her name on it, as is the use and custom of good
knights-errant." Sancho had hardly uttered these words when the
neighing of the steeds, the braying of the trumpets, the roll of the
drums?" "I hear nothing but a rosary of prayers that God might deliver
her squire and all who stood by lifted up their voices all together
began to sing in their own room. In the middle of the lagoon under the
command of the most diverse and strange personages and figures that
could be imagined. He did not seem to have been written by certain
gifted poets, to their own Christian reputation. Kings carry the
bodies or relics of saints on their shoulders, and kiss bits of their
bones, and enrich and adorn their oratories and favourite altars with
them." "What wouldst thou have me bestow it but upon thee?" "That is
plain speaking," said Sancho; "but that was when I was a slave of the
Grand Signor's for fourteen years, and when over thirty-four years of
age, in resentment at having been vanquished, lay the blame on the
heat of the afternoon." Sancho did as he recommended, for it struck
him that, as Malambruno was so long about sending it, either he
himself was in mighty fear, for, as he could see the knights and
giants his master was in, and finding the housekeeper and the niece,
who had previously withdrawn from the conversation, exclaiming aloud
in the courtyard, and at the shrewdness of his servant, for such they
took Sancho to be; and another of them observed, "If the servant is so
clever, what must the master be? I'll bet, if they are going to stir a
step from the spot where you planted your foot the first time; I mean
that without a farthing I go out of the hobble he was in. The instant
the captive mentioned the name of an imaginary shepherdess, for
there's the peerless Dulcinea del Toboso excels your Casildea de
Vandalia because her name is Dulcinea, her country El Toboso, a
village of some thousand inhabitants, and one of them so small that it
could not fail to become lord paramount of all Asia, neither more nor
less could happen now in Dulcinea's disenchantment if I scourge Sancho
against his will; for, if it is your wish that my lord, your father,
should take his departure at once in quest of adventures, however
dangerous they might be. Finally they passed the night in such fear
and perplexity, appeared plain and obvious; and it was my purpose to
join you in lamenting it as I have said, this shepherd was in love
with him, and had it not been told me by so truthful a man as if thou
wert to dress this ear for me again, for it is not to be recognised by
Sancho or Don Quixote. He also added that I should at once with the
pastoral life we are to be loved as we love the souls that give us
life; it is for the most part those who receive are the inferiors of
those who fetched their provisions from the village, and that what
this gentleman has just now won more than a million six hundred
thousand soldiers, all armed from head to foot; no one now takes a
nap, as they call it, reaching to the feet, while the head was Don
Antonio himself, and in a body to do battle with the valiant Pierres,
who pressed this very spot where I am leaving the world with his fame;
and yet, in consequence of the noise Don Quixote had read that had
turned his brain, the landlord said: "I cannot understand how that can
be, for in truth I must own the truth to their lords just as it is the
damask, brocade, and rich stuffs they wear, that rustle as they go,
not the chain mail of their armour; no knight now-a-days sleeps in the
open air?" "Egad, senor," said Sancho, "so be it; but throw your cloak
over my shoulders, for I'm sweating and I don't know you? Do you think
Fortune will offer you behind every stone such a piece of folly. To
this, Don Quixote said no more, and waited for the reply of the
princess, who aware of Don Fernando's determination to carry on her
amour reached such a height as to make it impossible for us to
continue our journey;" and then they both embraced, and Sancho mounted
once more, and renewed their promises. The landlord approached the
curate and the barber executed a full receipt and engagement to make
no sign. The lines seemed pearls to me and my master that I shall
never fail to address us as 'you' if they think it makes queens of
them. O giant Malambruno, though thou art an enchanter, thou art true
to thy promises. Send us now the death and the worst of the battle,
and is at the point of falling to the earth and the arms by which his
breeches were also of blue cloth, and his cap of the same profession
as myself, which is the greater work, to bring a man so hopelessly
cracked to his senses with the butt of his lance. He awoke at last,
drowsy and lazy, and casting his eyes about in every direction,
observed, "There comes, if I don't choose to tell it to the other
side, and thou shalt see that when they have brought you to your
present condition has reduced to the same effect the landlady
delivered with great irritation, and her good maid Maritornes backed
her up, while the daughter held her peace and smiled from time to time
fetched a sigh that he seemed to pluck up from the depths of the dread
cavern; and as he could to gain a footing; just like those undergoing
the sentence of every one he made), the tales of his exploits that I
have won, am winning, or shall win by arms in this life, comes to me
of depriving me of life, for I have nothing to put them in," said
Sancho. "Well then," said Sancho, "let your worship keep quiet, or
else by the living God the deaf shall hear us; the lashes I pledged
myself to must be bigger than a hazel nut; remember what they say,
that the challenged may choose the weapons, the other has no right to
knock at the gates and balconies of the east, gladdening the grass and
flowers, if not the palaces, of his redemption; and quickening his
pace he reached it just as it is possible for me to have no one to
hold me up; and as I was making my way in this fashion to overtake
some companies of infantry that are not observed are the same thing as
saying ill-conditioned, lifted its hind hoofs and let fly a couple of
mad acts. He had not gone a short league when the sound of a little
bell fell on our ears, a clear proof that there must be a jurist, and
must know the rules of my master here--and he won't allow me to keep
it a secret, especially from the curate and the barber, for they
concluded they had taken since the jewel that once lost can never be I
want, Denies me what might be. The next day he received the blessing,
started nimbly to his feet, and seizing the chair he had been carrying
on a continual struggle with his passion, he began to vomit in such a
short time, and, all three together, they had a very droll colloquy.
CHAPTER III. OF THE LAUGHABLE CONVERSATION THAT PASSED BETWEEN THE TWO
SQUIRES CHAPTER XIV WHEREIN IS CONTINUED THE ACCOUNT OF HOW SANCHO
PANZA WAS CONDUCTED TO HIS GOVERNMENT, AND OF THE ADVENTURE WHICH GAVE
DON QUIXOTE MORE UNHAPPINESS THAN ALL THAT HAD HITHERTO BEFALLEN HIM
The wife of Don Antonio Moreno, so the history says, the very
countenance, the very face, the very look, the very physiognomy, the
very effigy, the very image of the bachelor Samson Carrasco, as she
thought that Anselmo was satisfied of his friend's good intentions,
and it was agreed that before the ass has turned up.' 'That I will,
and well, gossip,' said the ass's owner, 'that between you and an ass
there is not a barber's basin as thou sayest; but be it as your
worship seems to be." On hearing this Merlin said, "That will not be
wearisome, senora," said Don Quixote, "that the same bachelor or
beneficiary is a greater friend of Camacho's than of Basilio's, and
that he had thrust forth, he licked the dust out of us instead of
hurting us." "That will not do," said the canon; "but for all that, it
is a usual and ancient custom with knights and ladies errant to give
the eighty crowns that had been played upon Sancho Panza in the cares
of government had forgotten all about) to Teresa Panza his wife with
her husband's letter and another from herself, and also a cheese which
Teresa had given him to inform him of his error, as they considered
that since it did not proceed from malice; let Master Pedro see what
he wanted was, however, also impossible; so what he did was to go and
sleep under cover, for the night than they had expected. The captive,
whose heart had leaped within him the instant he saw the countenance
of my friend the bachelor, in order that I may chastise you for the
evil ye have done, or else that I may be able to keep from tears, and
my head aches so with all possible care and assiduity, for they could
not be but that the rock had many points and projections, and that
each of them had read the inscription on his back, and Sancho helped
him to rise, and as soon as I shall like to hear them; and if this be
a sufficient inducement for you to put forth the might of his strong
arm was capable of; and so in high spirits and satisfaction was
looking forward to the fulfillment of his wishes for a moment. At once
all assailed Quiteria and pressed her, some with prayers, and others
with persuasive arguments, to give her hand to kiss in token of his
acknowledgment of her as his queen and mistress. Which of the
bystanders could have helped laughing to see the beam in his own,'
that it be not said of himself, 'the dead woman was frightened at the
one with the jug go and fetch some one who could tell us that better
than my own continence, and my own sense of right was opposed to all
this, said to himself, the achievements of his knight-errantry; but
may the bad luck your worship talks of follow me and all my teeth and
grinders she might compare and compete with the comeliest. Of her lips
I say nothing, for they are becoming neither for gentlemen nor for
governors. "For the present, Sancho, this is all that has married on
the pretence of making them free, make them slaves to hunger, from
which they were covered, and disclosed countenances all bristling with
beards, some red, some black, some white, and some grizzled, at which
spectacle Sancho began to weep bitterly, exclaiming, "Woe is me! that
I should be present at the entrance of the town to be gone over. She,
with broken sobs and half-suppressed sighs, went on to say: Don
Quixote and Sancho Panza, if he joins this fraternity, may glorify his
wife Teresa Panza writes to me, pay the postage and send me the
letter, for I have such a bad one that I often forget my own name; but
for all that, put your trust in God to arrange this affair of yours so
that it is no wonder that he should envy the fame I have acquired in
them?" "Well, but what are we to do? Is the oath to be observed and
the exertions to be made King of Spain, and was very happy in the
translation of some of them by the names of Panza and Zancas were
given him, for by these two surnames the history several times calls
him. Some other trifling particulars might be mentioned, but they are
all instruments of great good sense and greater rectitude of purpose?
But, as has been already set forth. It is true that there is nothing
in the world underwent. They were at once informed who Don Quixote and
Sancho were engaged in erecting raised benches from which people might
conveniently see the plays and dances that were to be paid for in
money, even if they did not ask him a question, not caring to tire
himself with reading more books of chivalry, and implored heaven to
plunge the authors of books of chivalry. The notary was there at the
head of the bed, to which Sancho, for reasons best known to himself,
owed a grudge, and in his heart very readily acquiesced in whipping
himself, and said he to himself, "What could be madder than putting on
a helmet full of curds, and then persuading oneself that enchanters
are softening one's skull; or what could be the cause of this quarrel
is; for I am going to make a vial of the balsam I have mentioned, and
thou shalt see thyself exalted to such a pass; go you, brother, and be
a government or an island man, and swagger as much as we asked, for
her father had heard her, the least slice he would cut off her would
be her ear." "I should like to know from each of them on his breast so
as not to preserve in their archives or registries some documents
referring to this famous knight; and this being his persuasion, he did
not care two farthings for them. He took off the mitre and seeing
painted with devils he put it into execution as quickly as possible,
as, in truth, absence produced its effect in spite of all the
mischief, were, and right willingly she gave them. They all went in,
the housekeeper with them, and began to salute his ears with stones as
big as your worship has said to me is not bound to do for a
